README.md, before:

# RabbitMQ Exporter [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter) [![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/r/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter?branch=master) [![](https://images.microbadger.com/badges/image/kbudde/rabbitmq-exporter.svg)](http://microbadger.com/images/kbudde/rabbitmq-exporter "Get your own image badge on microbadger.com")

Prometheus exporter for RabbitMQ metrics.
Data is scraped by [prometheus](https://prometheus.io).

# Breaking change -> 1.0.0

- RABBIT_CAPABILITIES are set to bert,no_sort
- new default port 9419

## Installation

### Binary release

You can download the latest release on the [release page](https://github.com/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter/releases).
Configuration is done with environment variables. See below.

### docker: rabbitmq container with network sharing

The rabbitmq_exporter is sharing the network interface with the rabbitmq container -> it is possible to use localhost and default user/password (guest).

1. Start rabbitMQ

        docker run -d -e RABBITMQ_NODENAME=my-rabbit --name my-rabbit -p 9419:9419 rabbitmq:3-management

1. Start rabbitmq_exporter in container.

        docker run -d --net=container:my-rabbit kbudde/rabbitmq-exporter

Now your metrics are exposed through [http://host:9419/metrics](http://host:9419/metrics). The management plugin does not need to be exposed.

## Configuration

Rabbitmq_exporter uses environment variables for configuration.
Settings:

Environment variable|default|description
--------------------|-------|------------
RABBIT_URL | <http://localhost:15672>| url to rabbitMQ management plugin (must start with http(s)://)
RABBIT_USER | guest | username for rabbitMQ management plugin. User needs monitoring tag!
RABBIT_PASSWORD | guest | password for rabbitMQ management plugin
RABBIT_USER_FILE| | location of file with username (useful for docker secrets)
RABBIT_PASSWORD_FILE | | location of file with password (useful for docker secrets)
PUBLISH_PORT | 9419 | Listening port for the exporter
PUBLISH_ADDR | "" | Listening host/IP for the exporter
OUTPUT_FORMAT | TTY | Log ouput format. TTY and JSON are suported
LOG_LEVEL | info | log level. possible values: "debug", "info", "warning", "error", "fatal", or "panic"
CAFILE | ca.pem | path to root certificate for access management plugin. Just needed if self signed certificate is used. Will be ignored if the file does not exist
SKIPVERIFY | false | true/0 will ignore certificate errors of the management plugin
SKIP_VHOST | ^$ |regex, matching vhost names are not exported. First performs INCLUDE_VHOST, then SKIP_VHOST
INCLUDE_VHOST | .* | reqgex vhost filter. Only queues in matching vhosts are exported
INCLUDE_QUEUES | .* | reqgex queue filter. just matching names are exported
SKIP_QUEUES | ^$ |regex, matching queue names are not exported (useful for short-lived rpc queues). First performed INCLUDE, after SKIP
RABBIT_CAPABILITIES | bert,no_sort | comma-separated list of extended scraping capabilities supported by the target RabbitMQ server
RABBIT_EXPORTERS | exchange,node,queue | List of enabled modules. Just "connections" is not enabled by default
RABBIT_TIMEOUT | 30 | timeout in seconds for retrieving data from management plugin.
MAX_QUEUES | 0 | max number of queues before we drop metrics (disabled if set to 0)
EXCLUDE_METRICS | | Metric names to exclude from export. comma-seperated. e.g. "recv_oct, recv_cnt". See exporter_*.go for names

Example and recommended settings:

    PUBLISH_PORT=9419 RABBIT_CAPABILITIES=bert,no_sort ./rabbitmq_exporter

### Extended RabbitMQ capabilities

Newer version of RabbitMQ can provide some features that reduce
overhead imposed by scraping the data needed by this exporter. The
following capabilities are currently supported in
`RABBIT_CAPABILITIES` env var:

* `no_sort`: By default RabbitMQ management plugin sorts results using
  the default sort order of vhost/name. This sorting overhead can be
  avoided by passing empty sort argument (`?sort=`) to RabbitMQ
  starting from version 3.6.8. This option can be safely enabled on
  earlier 3.6.X versions, but it'll not give any performance
  improvements. And it's incompatible with 3.4.X and 3.5.X.
* `bert`: Since 3.6.9 (see
   <https://github.com/rabbitmq/rabbitmq-management/pull/367>) RabbitMQ
   supports BERT encoding as a JSON alternative. Given that BERT
   encoding is implemented in C inside the Erlang VM, it's way more
   effective than pure-Erlang JSON encoding. So this greatly reduces
   monitoring overhead when we have a lot of objects in RabbitMQ.

## Metrics

All metrics (except golang/prometheus metrics) are prefixed with "rabbitmq_".

### Global

Always exported.

metric | description
-------| ------------
up | Was the last scrape of rabbitmq successful.
module_up | Was the last scrape of rabbitmq module successful. labels: module
module_scrape_duration_seconds | Duration of the last scrape of rabbitmq module. labels: module
rabbitmq_exporter_build_info | A metric with a constant '1' value labeled by version, revision, branch and build date on which the rabbitmq_exporter was built.

### Overview

Always exported.

metric | description
-------| ------------
|channels | Number of channels|
|connections | Number of connections|
|consumers | Number of message consumers|
|queues | Number of queues in use|
|exchangesTo | Number of exchanges in use|
|queue_messages_global | Number ready and unacknowledged messages in cluster.|
|queue_messages_ready_global | Number of messages ready to be delivered to clients.|
|queue_messages_unacknowledged_global | Number of messages delivered to clients but not yet acknowledged.|
|rabbitmq_version_info| A metric with a constant '1' value labeled by rabbitmq version, erlang version, node, cluster.|


### Queues

Labels: vhost, queue, durable, policy, self

#### Queues - Gauge

metric | description
-------| ------------
|queue_messages_ready|Number of messages ready to be delivered to clients.|
|queue_messages_unacknowledged|Number of messages delivered to clients but not yet acknowledged.|
|queue_messages|Sum of ready and unacknowledged messages (queue depth).|
|queue_messages_ready_ram|Number of messages from messages_ready which are resident in ram.|
|queue_messages_unacknowledged_ram|Number of messages from messages_unacknowledged which are resident in ram.|
|queue_messages_ram|Total number of messages which are resident in ram.|
|queue_messages_persistent|Total number of persistent messages in the queue (will always be 0 for transient queues).|
|queue_message_bytes|Sum of the size of all message bodies in the queue. This does not include the message properties (including headers) or any overhead.|
|queue_message_bytes_ready|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages ready to be delivered to clients.|
|queue_message_bytes_unacknowledged|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages delivered to clients but not yet acknowledged.|
|queue_message_bytes_ram|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages which are in RAM.|
|queue_message_bytes_persistent|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages which are persistent.|
|queue_consumers|Number of consumers.|
|queue_consumer_utilisation|Fraction of the time (between 0.0 and 1.0) that the queue is able to immediately deliver messages to consumers. This can be less than 1.0 if consumers are limited by network congestion or prefetch count.|
|queue_memory|Bytes of memory consumed by the Erlang process associated with the queue, including stack, heap and internal structures.|
|queue_head_message_timestamp|The timestamp property of the first message in the queue, if present. Timestamps of messages only appear when they are in the paged-in state.|
|queue_status|A metric with a value of constant '1' if the queue is in a certain state. Labels: vhost, queue, *state* (running, flow,..)|
|queue_max_length_bytes|Total body size for ready messages a queue can contain before it starts to drop them from its head.|
|queue_max_length|How many (ready) messages a queue can contain before it starts to drop them from its head.|


#### Queues - Counter

metric | description
-------| ------------
|queue_disk_reads_total|Total number of times messages have been read from disk by this queue since it started.|
|queue_disk_writes_total|Total number of times messages have been written to disk by this queue since it started.|
|queue_messages_published_total|Count of messages published.|
|queue_messages_confirmed_total|Count of messages confirmed. |
|queue_messages_delivered_total|Count of messages delivered in acknowledgement mode to consumers.|
|queue_messages_delivered_noack_total|Count of messages delivered in no-acknowledgement mode to consumers. |
|queue_messages_get_total|Count of messages delivered in acknowledgement mode in response to basic.get.|
|queue_messages_get_noack_total|Count of messages delivered in no-acknowledgement mode in response to basic.get.|
|queue_messages_redelivered_total|Count of subset of messages in deliver_get which had the redelivered flag set.|
|queue_messages_returned_total|Count of messages returned to publisher as unroutable.|

### Exchanges - Counter

Labels: vhost, exchange

metric | description
-------| ------------
|exchange_messages_published_in_total|Count of messages published in to an exchange, i.e. not taking account of routing.|
|exchange_messages_published_out_total|Count of messages published out of an exchange, i.e. taking account of routing.|

### Node - Counter

Labels: node, self

metric | description
-------| ------------
|running|number of running nodes|
|node_mem_used|Memory used in bytes|
|node_mem_limit|Point at which the memory alarm will go off|
|node_mem_alarm|Whether the memory alarm has gone off|
|node_disk_free|Disk free space in bytes.|
|node_disk_free_alarm|Whether the disk alarm has gone off.|
|node_disk_free_limit|Point at which the disk alarm will go off.|
|fd_used|Used File descriptors|
|fd_available|File descriptors available|
|sockets_used|File descriptors used as sockets.|
|sockets_available|File descriptors available for use as sockets|
|partitions | Current Number of network partitions. 0 is ok. If the cluster is splitted the value is at least 2|

### Connections - Gauge

_disabled by default_. Depending on the environment and change rate it can create a high number of dead metrics. Otherwise it could be usefull and can be enabled.

Labels: vhost, node, peer_host, user, self

Please note: The data is aggregated by label values as it is possible that there are multiple connections for a certain combination of labels. 

metric | description
-------| ------------
|connection_channels|number of channels in use|
|connection_received_bytes|received bytes|
|connection_received_packets|received packets|
|connection_send_bytes|send bytes|
|connection_send_packets|send packets|
|connection_send_pending|Send queue size|


Labels: vhost, node, peer_host, user, *state* (running, flow,..), self
metric | description
-------| ------------
|connection_status|Number of connections in a certain state aggregated per label combination. Metric will disappear if there are no connections in a state. |

## Docker

To create a docker image locally it is recommened to use the Makefile.
Promu is used for building the statically linked binary which is added to the scratch image.

       make docker

Commit message:

added queue_idle_since_seconds metric
metrics represents the timestamp the queue started idling.
queue_state "running" is replaced by "idle" if idle_sine timestamp exists

fixes #119

README.md, after:

# RabbitMQ Exporter [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter) [![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/r/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter?branch=master) [![](https://images.microbadger.com/badges/image/kbudde/rabbitmq-exporter.svg)](http://microbadger.com/images/kbudde/rabbitmq-exporter "Get your own image badge on microbadger.com")

Prometheus exporter for RabbitMQ metrics.
Data is scraped by [prometheus](https://prometheus.io).

# Breaking change -> 1.0.0

- RABBIT_CAPABILITIES are set to bert,no_sort
- new default port 9419

## Installation

### Binary release

You can download the latest release on the [release page](https://github.com/kbudde/rabbitmq_exporter/releases).
Configuration is done with environment variables. See below.

### docker: rabbitmq container with network sharing

The rabbitmq_exporter is sharing the network interface with the rabbitmq container -> it is possible to use localhost and default user/password (guest).

1. Start rabbitMQ

        docker run -d -e RABBITMQ_NODENAME=my-rabbit --name my-rabbit -p 9419:9419 rabbitmq:3-management

1. Start rabbitmq_exporter in container.

        docker run -d --net=container:my-rabbit kbudde/rabbitmq-exporter

Now your metrics are exposed through [http://host:9419/metrics](http://host:9419/metrics). The management plugin does not need to be exposed.

## Configuration

Rabbitmq_exporter uses environment variables for configuration.
Settings:

Environment variable|default|description
--------------------|-------|------------
RABBIT_URL | <http://localhost:15672>| url to rabbitMQ management plugin (must start with http(s)://)
RABBIT_USER | guest | username for rabbitMQ management plugin. User needs monitoring tag!
RABBIT_PASSWORD | guest | password for rabbitMQ management plugin
RABBIT_USER_FILE| | location of file with username (useful for docker secrets)
RABBIT_PASSWORD_FILE | | location of file with password (useful for docker secrets)
PUBLISH_PORT | 9419 | Listening port for the exporter
PUBLISH_ADDR | "" | Listening host/IP for the exporter
OUTPUT_FORMAT | TTY | Log ouput format. TTY and JSON are suported
LOG_LEVEL | info | log level. possible values: "debug", "info", "warning", "error", "fatal", or "panic"
CAFILE | ca.pem | path to root certificate for access management plugin. Just needed if self signed certificate is used. Will be ignored if the file does not exist
SKIPVERIFY | false | true/0 will ignore certificate errors of the management plugin
SKIP_VHOST | ^$ |regex, matching vhost names are not exported. First performs INCLUDE_VHOST, then SKIP_VHOST
INCLUDE_VHOST | .* | reqgex vhost filter. Only queues in matching vhosts are exported
INCLUDE_QUEUES | .* | reqgex queue filter. just matching names are exported
SKIP_QUEUES | ^$ |regex, matching queue names are not exported (useful for short-lived rpc queues). First performed INCLUDE, after SKIP
RABBIT_CAPABILITIES | bert,no_sort | comma-separated list of extended scraping capabilities supported by the target RabbitMQ server
RABBIT_EXPORTERS | exchange,node,queue | List of enabled modules. Just "connections" is not enabled by default
RABBIT_TIMEOUT | 30 | timeout in seconds for retrieving data from management plugin.
MAX_QUEUES | 0 | max number of queues before we drop metrics (disabled if set to 0)
EXCLUDE_METRICS | | Metric names to exclude from export. comma-seperated. e.g. "recv_oct, recv_cnt". See exporter_*.go for names

Example and recommended settings:

    PUBLISH_PORT=9419 RABBIT_CAPABILITIES=bert,no_sort ./rabbitmq_exporter

### Extended RabbitMQ capabilities

Newer version of RabbitMQ can provide some features that reduce
overhead imposed by scraping the data needed by this exporter. The
following capabilities are currently supported in
`RABBIT_CAPABILITIES` env var:

* `no_sort`: By default RabbitMQ management plugin sorts results using
  the default sort order of vhost/name. This sorting overhead can be
  avoided by passing empty sort argument (`?sort=`) to RabbitMQ
  starting from version 3.6.8. This option can be safely enabled on
  earlier 3.6.X versions, but it'll not give any performance
  improvements. And it's incompatible with 3.4.X and 3.5.X.
* `bert`: Since 3.6.9 (see
   <https://github.com/rabbitmq/rabbitmq-management/pull/367>) RabbitMQ
   supports BERT encoding as a JSON alternative. Given that BERT
   encoding is implemented in C inside the Erlang VM, it's way more
   effective than pure-Erlang JSON encoding. So this greatly reduces
   monitoring overhead when we have a lot of objects in RabbitMQ.

## Metrics

All metrics (except golang/prometheus metrics) are prefixed with "rabbitmq_".

### Global

Always exported.

metric | description
-------| ------------
up | Was the last scrape of rabbitmq successful.
module_up | Was the last scrape of rabbitmq module successful. labels: module
module_scrape_duration_seconds | Duration of the last scrape of rabbitmq module. labels: module
rabbitmq_exporter_build_info | A metric with a constant '1' value labeled by version, revision, branch and build date on which the rabbitmq_exporter was built.

### Overview

Always exported.

metric | description
-------| ------------
|channels | Number of channels|
|connections | Number of connections|
|consumers | Number of message consumers|
|queues | Number of queues in use|
|exchangesTo | Number of exchanges in use|
|queue_messages_global | Number ready and unacknowledged messages in cluster.|
|queue_messages_ready_global | Number of messages ready to be delivered to clients.|
|queue_messages_unacknowledged_global | Number of messages delivered to clients but not yet acknowledged.|
|rabbitmq_version_info| A metric with a constant '1' value labeled by rabbitmq version, erlang version, node, cluster.|


### Queues

Labels: vhost, queue, durable, policy, self

#### Queues - Gauge

metric | description
-------| ------------
|queue_messages_ready|Number of messages ready to be delivered to clients.|
|queue_messages_unacknowledged|Number of messages delivered to clients but not yet acknowledged.|
|queue_messages|Sum of ready and unacknowledged messages (queue depth).|
|queue_messages_ready_ram|Number of messages from messages_ready which are resident in ram.|
|queue_messages_unacknowledged_ram|Number of messages from messages_unacknowledged which are resident in ram.|
|queue_messages_ram|Total number of messages which are resident in ram.|
|queue_messages_persistent|Total number of persistent messages in the queue (will always be 0 for transient queues).|
|queue_message_bytes|Sum of the size of all message bodies in the queue. This does not include the message properties (including headers) or any overhead.|
|queue_message_bytes_ready|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages ready to be delivered to clients.|
|queue_message_bytes_unacknowledged|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages delivered to clients but not yet acknowledged.|
|queue_message_bytes_ram|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages which are in RAM.|
|queue_message_bytes_persistent|Like message_bytes but counting only those messages which are persistent.|
|queue_consumers|Number of consumers.|
|queue_consumer_utilisation|Fraction of the time (between 0.0 and 1.0) that the queue is able to immediately deliver messages to consumers. This can be less than 1.0 if consumers are limited by network congestion or prefetch count.|
|queue_memory|Bytes of memory consumed by the Erlang process associated with the queue, including stack, heap and internal structures.|
|queue_head_message_timestamp|The timestamp property of the first message in the queue, if present. Timestamps of messages only appear when they are in the paged-in state.|
|queue_max_length_bytes|Total body size for ready messages a queue can contain before it starts to drop them from its head.|
|queue_max_length|How many (ready) messages a queue can contain before it starts to drop them from its head.|
|queue_idle_since_seconds|starttime where the queue switched to idle state; seconds since epoch (1970); only set if queue state is idle|
|queue_status|A metric with a value of constant '1' if the queue is in a certain state. Labels: vhost, queue, *state* (running, idle, flow,..)|

#### Queues - Counter

metric | description
-------| ------------
|queue_disk_reads_total|Total number of times messages have been read from disk by this queue since it started.|
|queue_disk_writes_total|Total number of times messages have been written to disk by this queue since it started.|
|queue_messages_published_total|Count of messages published.|
|queue_messages_confirmed_total|Count of messages confirmed. |
|queue_messages_delivered_total|Count of messages delivered in acknowledgement mode to consumers.|
|queue_messages_delivered_noack_total|Count of messages delivered in no-acknowledgement mode to consumers. |
|queue_messages_get_total|Count of messages delivered in acknowledgement mode in response to basic.get.|
|queue_messages_get_noack_total|Count of messages delivered in no-acknowledgement mode in response to basic.get.|
|queue_messages_redelivered_total|Count of subset of messages in deliver_get which had the redelivered flag set.|
|queue_messages_returned_total|Count of messages returned to publisher as unroutable.|

### Exchanges - Counter

Labels: vhost, exchange

metric | description
-------| ------------
|exchange_messages_published_in_total|Count of messages published in to an exchange, i.e. not taking account of routing.|
|exchange_messages_published_out_total|Count of messages published out of an exchange, i.e. taking account of routing.|

### Node - Counter

Labels: node, self

metric | description
-------| ------------
|running|number of running nodes|
|node_mem_used|Memory used in bytes|
|node_mem_limit|Point at which the memory alarm will go off|
|node_mem_alarm|Whether the memory alarm has gone off|
|node_disk_free|Disk free space in bytes.|
|node_disk_free_alarm|Whether the disk alarm has gone off.|
|node_disk_free_limit|Point at which the disk alarm will go off.|
|fd_used|Used File descriptors|
|fd_available|File descriptors available|
|sockets_used|File descriptors used as sockets.|
|sockets_available|File descriptors available for use as sockets|
|partitions | Current Number of network partitions. 0 is ok. If the cluster is splitted the value is at least 2|

### Connections - Gauge

_disabled by default_. Depending on the environment and change rate it can create a high number of dead metrics. Otherwise it could be usefull and can be enabled.

Labels: vhost, node, peer_host, user, self

Please note: The data is aggregated by label values as it is possible that there are multiple connections for a certain combination of labels. 

metric | description
-------| ------------
|connection_channels|number of channels in use|
|connection_received_bytes|received bytes|
|connection_received_packets|received packets|
|connection_send_bytes|send bytes|
|connection_send_packets|send packets|
|connection_send_pending|Send queue size|


Labels: vhost, node, peer_host, user, *state* (running, flow,..), self
metric | description
-------| ------------
|connection_status|Number of connections in a certain state aggregated per label combination. Metric will disappear if there are no connections in a state. |

## Docker

To create a docker image locally it is recommened to use the Makefile.
Promu is used for building the statically linked binary which is added to the scratch image.

       make docker
